---
bg: "IMG_20190318_100605_759.jpg"
layout: post
title:  "My approach to planning travel"
crawlertitle: "How to plan to travel"
summary: "the first step into the world"
date:   2019-03-22 19:16:30
categories: posts
tags: 'planning'
author: neha
---
To begin with, I'm no travel expert. I'm planning my gap year, and I decided to make this blog after a lot of meticulous research and a feeling that I was learning far too much about travel to keep it all to myself. If I can help anyone else with any of the travel tips I post here, I'll consider myself a success.

I've broken down travelling into all of the main aspects you need to think about when you want to explore somewhere new. Some of that is as free of charge as daydreaming or taking the initiative to Google the country that's caught your eye. Other parts, once you get deeper into your research, are where you have to strike the balance between what you want and what you're willing to spend. In other words, how much comfort, safety, and luxury do you need, and how much will you have to save up for that to happen? These vary from person to person. One person might not mind hitching a ride to whichever country their driver's headed towards, whereas another might get uncomfortable without a full itinerary with everything booked in advance so all they need to do is go and enjoy themselves. There's nothing wrong eith either approach or anything in between, but just from those two examples you can imagine the difference in budget our two travellers would need.

### Research:
This part is, as tedious as it can get, the part that you'll spend the most time on. Generally, the less time you spend on researching everything you're going to book, the more money you'll spend on the rest of the trip. This of course excludes intentionally planning less e.g. our earlier example of planning to hitch rides to see where you end up. We're assuming you've underplanned for a trip for which you booked flights, a hotel, etc. Doing more research will get you better deals.

### Packing:
Often overlooked, this element has become my favourite part of preparing for a trip. Don't leave it to the end! Your transport and accomodation will affect how light you'll need to pack more than you'd think, so think about reducing your load as early as possible. Make checklists of what you need, choose your bags carefully, and when it comes down to it, pack efficiently to make use of all of the space you've got. I've packed for a two week trip in a carry-on suitcase and a backpack before. It's a skill you'll be glad you learned.

### Transport:
So you've done your research, and you've got everything you need in your case. Remember to sort out visas and work permits if you need them, as well as the method of transport you'll be booking tickets for. Think about how you've chosen to pack, because your luggage could become a serious hassle if it's too much for your train or flight, and you might have to pay extra to be able to bring everything you need. Depending on the nature of your trip, packages like round-the-world flight tickets and interrail passes could be cheaper and/or easier.

### Accomodation:
This is arguably the main aspect where you'll be thinking about the comfort levels you need. You have plenty of options. You could splash out on a resort or five star hotel, or at the other extreme, stay for cheap in a hostel. Don't be afraid to try things you've never done before. You might discover that #vanlife is perfect for you, or that your ideal accomodation is a yurt under a clear sky. It might also be cheaper to stay in smaller towns near the big city you want to visit. The lifestyle and culture will be similar enough that you'll love where you're staying and can get cheaper rates, with just an hour or so trip into the city centre.

### Food:
One of the best things about travelling is immersing yourself into the culture of a location, and food can represent a culture perfectly. Not just in the types of food that are eaten, but in the ways they're eaten. The Spanish, for example, have tapas bars where a variety of small dishes replace a larger meal when accompanied with a social outing with family or friends. Following the traditions of the region you're visiting will be a lot more fun and give you more chances to meet locals than if you try to bring your own routines abroad.

### Extra:
This is more to do with your budget than anything else. Leave some flexibility in your itinerary and your spending money for chances to get lost in a beautiful city or find the perfect souvenir at a local market. It'll also come in handy in an emergency, where you're tired and lost and just need a taxi to take you back to your hotel without needing any more struggle with maps.

Of course, this isn't a comprehensive list. It is a good starting point for planning, and the planning structure I'm using for my gap year right now. Feel free to use it, or [suggest changes](https://neha-snkl.github.io/contact/) to it.