---
bg: "IMG_20190318_175918_988.jpg"
layout: post
title:  "Voluntourism"
crawlertitle: "More harmful than it seems"
summary: "good intentions, bad impacts"
date:   2019-04-11 19:16:30
categories: posts
tags: 'voluntourism'
author: neha
---
At first glance, building a new school for orphans in Nepal or a well for a village in Ethiopia sounds like a noble gesture. Volunteer tourism, or “voluntourism” is a type of tourism which has grown exponentially in recent years. And why wouldn’t it? Those countries are so hopelessly impoverished that they need us to save them, right? Not really. Both of the countries I gave as examples have some of the fastest economic growth rates in the world, much higher than most countries in Europe and North America. So why is it that our perception of most of Asia, South America and Africa is an image of poverty and suffering?

Most of our perception of African, South American, and Asian countries comes from heart wrenching adverts we see on TV of impoverished children surrounded by violence and/or in desperate need of resources. However, [the majority of countries with the highest projected economic growth in 2019 are in these continents.] (https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/NGDP_RPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/WEOWORLD) So why exactly is it that we still have this distorted view of these countries which seem to be well ahead of our western imaginations of them? The answer may lie in [wealth disparity]. (https://www.theguardian.com/inequality/datablog/2017/apr/26/inequality-index-where-are-the-worlds-most-unequal-countries) It's an issue which plagues all countries, as most of them are very far from a 0% figure which would indicate complete income equality in quite a communist hypothetical situation. It seems to be, however, most concentrated in parts of South America and Africa. The solution to the problem, then, must be a political one.

There are two main reasons I take issue with the voluntourism trend. Firstly, the misguided intentions, which have some concerning roots. And secondly, the fact that the voluntourists often do more harm than good in the communities they work with.

The idea of Western people “saving” communities is not new. Church community groups often make trips to impoverished parts of the world hoping to make a difference, but in all honesty, the money raised to make these journeys would be better spent investing in local poor communities. Voluntourism does nothing to address the actual issues causing the economic inequality, and voluntourists often forget about (or just aren't aware of) the economic diversity in the country they're visiting. Before world travel was as commonly available, groups would focus more on their own local issues. There was much more of an opportunity to build a meaningful relationship with people in need.  Aside from the obvious issues in depriving the children in these various countries of those long term relationships with tourists who spend only a few weeks with them, many of the "orphans" have parents that were [forced to give them up] (https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/sep/13/the-business-of-voluntourism-do-western-do-gooders-actually-do-harm) to companies that offer care for their children that they could not provide themselves.

Voluntourists are also often unqualified to do the job they spend thousands to travel out to do. Would you trust a group of 20 teenagers on a construction site working on a new school building in your home country? Why are we [sending them out](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/little-white-girls-voluntourism_b_4834574) to do the same in Cambodia or Kenya? As a 17 year old girl from the UK, planning my gap year has been an endless cycle of finding projects that seem to be useful ways to work on the language skills I'm studying, only to find out after some more research that the project doesn't require any skills in French or Spanish, just an English speaker with a willingness to work hard and a good attitude (also known as £2000 which would go directly into the pockets of the company sending us out there). Here's hoping I can dodge all the right bullets, and maybe encourage some of you to steer clear of projects like these too.